Such narratives for a particular set of measurements or observations are not created de novo. They rest on meta-narratives about how this or that set of phenomena work. The activity of cells changes because signals they receive are conveyed to the genome and result in the regulation of genes. Quantum mechanics permits particles to traverse energy barriers in ways forbidden in classical mechanics.
Science progresses not just through an interplay of theory and experiment (as per Feynman) but through a delicate dance between those two milieux and the metaphors and narratives deployed to frame its explanations, as they are propagated not just from experts to lay audiences but also among specialists themselves.
What I want to suggest here is, first, that science is often not a competition between theories but a process of narrative creation in which the paradigm tends to be set by the most persuasive narrative—which is often the one that has the most intuitive and compelling metaphors.
This modus operandi is well attested in the history of science,[4] and yet the apparent paradox is that science does make progress, rather than becoming merely a succession of changing stories, each hostage to the preconceptions of its times. I don’t propose here to explain that puzzle, long noted by historians and philosophers of science. But in threading the needle between relativism and social constructivism on the one hand and naïve realism on the other, I wish to draw attention to what I believe to be a neglected issue: we have no mechanism for assessing metaphors and narratives, for example to see whether they continue to match the empirical facts. Much of the important work done by metaphor and narrative in science happens, so to speak, out of sight: it tends to come in the form of traditions and customs that are inherited through the culture of science and, like many cultural norms, rarely questioned. I believe that this aspect of science cannot and should not be subjected to some kind of rigorous testing and scrutiny in the way that theories are; by their very nature, metaphors and narratives need to be afforded space for ambiguity, for open-endedness, and for plurality. Rather, the process needs to happen “in the open” and with recognition that these tools are not simply pedagogical but shape the way scientific questions are framed, priorities set, and resources allocated.